Added New Material System Documentation (#1730)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/atom-guide/dev-guide/materials/lua-material-functor-api.md

    if(nil == textureMap) then
        context:SetMaterialPropertyVisibility("useTexture", MaterialPropertyVisibility_Hidden)
        context:SetMaterialPropertyVisibility("textureMapUv", MaterialPropertyVisibility_Hidden)
        context:SetMaterialPropertyVisibility("factor", MaterialPropertyVisibility_Enabled)
    elseif(not useTexture) then
        context:SetMaterialPropertyVisibility("useTexture", MaterialPropertyVisibility_Enabled)
        context:SetMaterialPropertyVisibility("textureMapUv", MaterialPropertyVisibility_Disabled)
        context:SetMaterialPropertyVisibility("factor", MaterialPropertyVisibility_Enabled)
    else
        context:SetMaterialPropertyVisibility("useTexture", MaterialPropertyVisibility_Enabled)
        context:SetMaterialPropertyVisibility("textureMapUv", MaterialPropertyVisibility_Enabled)
        context:SetMaterialPropertyVisibility("factor", MaterialPropertyVisibility_Hidden)
    end
end
```

## Global Utility Functions

These functions are available in the global scope.

* **Error**(`string`): report an error message to AZ_Error.
* **Warning**(`string`): report a warning message to AZ_Warning.

> * **Print**(`string`): report a message to AZ_TracePrintf.

Reviewer: Should these functions be in section User Guide > Lua? Since they are in the global scope and apply to all Lua functions, not just Materials.

Author: They are in the global scope for lua material functor scripts. They are not available in the lua gameplay script context.

Author: Global scope just means they aren't inside some object like "context" (i.e. "context:GetMaterialPropertyValue")

{{< /note >}}

* ComparisonFunc_Never
* ComparisonFunc_Less
* ComparisonFunc_Equal
* ComparisonFunc_LessEqual
* ComparisonFunc_Greater
* ComparisonFunc_NotEqual
* ComparisonFunc_GreaterEqual
* ComparisonFunc_Always
* ComparisonFunc_Invalid

#### BlendFactor

* BlendFactor_Zero
* BlendFactor_One
* BlendFactor_ColorSource
* BlendFactor_ColorSourceInverse
* BlendFactor_AlphaSource
* BlendFactor_AlphaSourceInverse
* BlendFactor_AlphaDest
* BlendFactor_AlphaDestInverse
* BlendFactor_ColorDest
* BlendFactor_ColorDestInverse
* BlendFactor_AlphaSourceSaturate
* BlendFactor_Factor
* BlendFactor_FactorInverse
* BlendFactor_ColorSource1
* BlendFactor_ColorSource1Inverse
* BlendFactor_AlphaSource1
* BlendFactor_AlphaSource1Inverse
* BlendFactor_Invalid

#### BlendOp

* BlendOp_Add
* BlendOp_Subtract
* BlendOp_SubtractReverse
* BlendOp_Minimum
* BlendOp_Maximum
* BlendOp_Invalid

#### DepthWriteMask

* DepthWriteMask_Zero
* DepthWriteMask_All
* DepthWriteMask_Invalid

#### StencilOp

* StencilOp_Keep
* StencilOp_Zero
* StencilOp_Replace
* StencilOp_IncrementSaturate
* StencilOp_DecrementSaturate
* StencilOp_Invert
* StencilOp_Increment
* StencilOp_Decrement
* StencilOp_Invalid

> 

Reviewer: Create a related topics section. Add a link to the "Lua" section in User Guide.

```
## Related topics
| Related topics | Details | 
| --- | --- |
| | [Lua](/docs/user-guide/scripting/lua/) | Use Lua in Open 3D Engine (O3DE) to automate your game project. |
```

Author: I believe you are referring to https://www.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/scripting/lua/ . This section of documentation is dedicated to lua gameplay scripting in O3DE. This is a separate topic and mostly unrelated to lua material functors. It's the same scripting language but the APIs are totally different. The only part that would be relevant are the links to official lua documentation (https://www.o3de.org/docs/user-guide/scripting/lua/#learning-lua).

I can add a note to clarify this.

Reviewer: In that case, a link to the Lua documentation would be helpful! Can you still add it to a Related topics section at the bottom of this page?

---
title: "Lua Material Functor API"
description: "Lua material functors allow custom logic for processing material properties."
toc: true
---

Lua material functors allow custom logic for processing material properties. They can read property values, set shader inputs and shader options, configure render states, adjust material property visibility in the editor, and more.

## Name context

> The material functor may execute in an implicit name context, where certain prefixes are attached to the names that appear in the script. This allows the same lua script to be used in different contexts, for example in one material type it might exist in a group with the name "metallic" and in another the group might be called "metalness". In both cases, the groups have properties "texture" and "factor". The functor will reference the properties as simply "texture" or "factor" and the system will automatically prepend the appropriate name context internally. Material properties, shader inputs (constants or images), and shader options each potentially have a separate name context. Search "prefix" in the [Material Type File Specification](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/materials/material-type-file-spec/) for details about how the name context may be specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The material functor may execute in an implicit name context, where certain prefixes are attached to the names that appear in the script. This allows the same Lua script to be used in different contexts. For example, one material type might have a group named "metallic", and another material type has a group named "metalness". In both cases, the groups have the properties `texture` and `factor`. The Lua functor will reference the properties as simply "texture" or "factor" and the system will automatically prepend the appropriate name context internally. Material properties, shader inputs (constants or images), and shader options each potentially have a separate name context. For details about how the name context may be specified, search "prefix" in the [Material Type File Specification](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/materials/material-type-file-spec/) .
```

  * **GetMaterialPropertyValue_Image**(`string`): Returns a generic pointer `userdata` type if an image is available, or `nil` otherwise.

### **HasMaterialProperty(`string`)**

Returns a boolean whether a property with the given name exists. Note the material property does not have to be listed in [GetMaterialPropertyDependencies](#main-functions) because this functions is just checking availability, not *reading values*.

### **SetShaderConstant\_**

Each **SetShaderConstant\_** function takes a `string` shader input name and value to set. You must use the version that matches the data type of the shader input.

  * **SetShaderConstant_bool**(`string`, `boolean`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_int**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_uint**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_float**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Vector2**(`string`, `Vector2`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Vector3**(`string`, `Vector3`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Vector4**(`string`, `Vector4`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Color**(`string`, `Color`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Matrix3x3**(`string`, `Matrix3x3`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Matrix4x4**(`string`, `Matrix4x4`)

> ### **SetShaderOptionValue\_**

Reviewer: There's two **SetShaderOptionValue_** sections with the same content, in **Process(context) functions** and **ShaderItem functions**. Is this intentional?

Reviewer: The first option is suitable and clear. 
> "context:SetShaderOptionValue_" and "shaderItem:SetShaderOptionValue_"

Yeah, the right-pane TOC not scrolling with you is a pain. I believe there's an issue for it, just hasn't been addressed.

Author: I had already gone with option 2. Otherwise I feel we'd have to update every other function heading to use "context:", "shaderItem:" etc, which is a bit much just for this one case of possible confusion.

---
title: "Lua Material Functor API"
description: "Lua material functors allow custom logic for processing material properties."
toc: true
---

Lua material functors allow custom logic for processing material properties. They can read property values, set shader inputs and shader options, configure render states, adjust material property visibility in the editor, and more.

For general information on the Lua programming language, see [Learning Lua](docs/user-guide/scripting/lua/#learning-lua).

{{< note >}}
*Lua material functors* are distinct from *[Lua gameplay scripts](docs/user-guide/scripting/lua/)*. While they both use the Lua language, the APIs and programming environment are mostly separate. Features like EBuses, the Properties Table, and Entity integration are exclusive to gameplay scripts, and are not available to Lua material functors. The [Lua Math Library](/docs/user-guide/scripting/lua/math-library/) is the only part of the API that is common to both systems.
{{< /note >}}

## Name context

> The material functor may execute in an implicit name context, where certain prefixes are attached to the names that appear in the script. This allows the same Lua script to be used in different contexts. For example, one material type might have a group named "metallic", and another material type has a group named "metalness". In both cases, the groups have the properties `texture` and `factor`. The Lua functor will reference the properties as simply "texture" or "factor" and the system will automatically prepend the appropriate name context internally. Material properties, shader inputs (constants or images), and shader options each potentially have a separate name context. For details about how the name context may be specified, search "prefix" in the [Material Type File Specification](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/materials/material-type-file-spec/) .

Reviewer: Minor - Suggest breaking this up for easier scannability.
```suggestion
The material functor may execute in an implicit name context, where certain prefixes are attached to the names that appear in the script. This allows the same Lua script to be used in different contexts. 

For example, one material type might have a group named "metallic", and another material type has a group named "metalness". In both cases, the groups have the properties `texture` and `factor`. The Lua functor will reference the properties as simply "texture" or "factor" and the system will automatically prepend the appropriate name context internally. Material properties, shader inputs (constants or images), and shader options each potentially have a separate name context. 

For details about how the name context may be specified, search "prefix" in the [Material Type File Specification](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/materials/material-type-file-spec/) .
```

  * **SetShaderConstant_float**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Vector2**(`string`, `Vector2`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Vector3**(`string`, `Vector3`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Vector4**(`string`, `Vector4`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Color**(`string`, `Color`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Matrix3x3**(`string`, `Matrix3x3`)
  * **SetShaderConstant_Matrix4x4**(`string`, `Matrix4x4`)

### SetShaderOptionValue\_

Each **SetShaderOptionValue\_** function takes a `string` shader option name and value to set. The value will be applied to all shaders in the material type that have an option with the given name. You must use the version that matches the data type of the shader option. The shader option must be listed in [GetShaderOptionDependencies](#main-functions).

  * **SetShaderOptionValue_bool**(`string`, `boolean`)
  * **SetShaderOptionValue_uint**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetShaderOptionValue_enum**(`string`, `number`)

{{< note >}}
There are similar [SetShaderOptionValue\_](#setshaderoptionvalue_-1) functions in the `ShaderItem` object that operate on a single shader.
{{< /note >}}

### GetShaderCount()

Returns the number of shaders in the material type.

> ### GetShader(`number`)
> 
> Returns a [`ShaderItem`](#shaderitem-functions) at a given index, or a dummy [`ShaderItem`](#shaderitem-functions) if the index is out of bounds. See [ShaderItem functions](#shader-functions). 
> 
> ### GetShaderByTag(`string`)
> 
> Returns a [`ShaderItem`](#shaderitem-functions) that has a given tag name, or a dummy [`ShaderItem`](#shaderitem-functions) if the name is not found. See [ShaderItem functions](#shader-functions) and [Shader tags in the Material Type File Specification](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/materials/material-type-file-spec/#shaders). 

Reviewer: Removed duplicate links. I think the one link suffices. Also fixed the link.
```suggestion
### GetShader(`number`)

Returns a `ShaderItem` at a given index, or a dummy `ShaderItem` if the index is out of bounds. See [ShaderItem functions](#shader-functions). 

### GetShaderByTag(`string`)

Returns a `ShaderItem` that has a given tag name, or a dummy `ShaderItem` if the name is not found. See [ShaderItem functions](#shaderitem-functions) and [Shader tags in the Material Type File Specification](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/materials/material-type-file-spec/#shaders). 
```

Author: I think you meant to link shaderitem-functions.
```suggestion
### GetShader(`number`)

Returns a `ShaderItem` at a given index, or a dummy `ShaderItem` if the index is out of bounds. See [ShaderItem functions](#shaderitem-functions). 

### GetShaderByTag(`string`)

Returns a `ShaderItem` that has a given tag name, or a dummy `ShaderItem` if the name is not found. See [ShaderItem functions](#shaderitem-functions) and [Shader tags in the Material Type File Specification](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/materials/material-type-file-spec/#shaders). 
```

  * **SetMaterialPropertyMaxValue_int**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetMaterialPropertyMaxValue_uint**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetMaterialPropertyMaxValue_float**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetMaterialPropertySoftMinValue_int**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetMaterialPropertySoftMinValue_uint**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetMaterialPropertySoftMinValue_float**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetMaterialPropertySoftMaxValue_int**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetMaterialPropertySoftMaxValue_uint**(`string`, `number`)
  * **SetMaterialPropertySoftMaxValue_float**(`string`, `number`)
* **SetMaterialPropertyGroupVisibility**(`string`, [`MaterialPropertyVisibility`](#materialpropertyvisibility)): Similar to `SetMaterialPropertyVisibility`, sets the visibility of an entire group rather than a single property.

## ShaderItem functions

ShaderItem is a lua `userdata` item with the following functions:

### GetRenderStatesOverride()

Returns a [`RenderStates`](#renderstates-functions) object that can be used to set overrides for any available render state.

### SetEnabled(boolean)

Sets whether the shader should be enabled or not.

### SetDrawListTagOverride(`string`)

> Overrides the draw list tag name that the shader will use. Set to empty string to clear the override and restore the value from the *.shader* file. See `DrawList` in the [Shader File Specification](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/shaders/shader-file-spec/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overrides the draw list tag name that the shader will use. Set to empty string to clear the override and restore the value from the *.shader* file. See `DrawList` in the [Shader File Specification](/docs/atom-guide/look-dev/shaders/shader-file-spec/).
```

Lua material functors allow custom logic for processing material properties. They can read property values, set shader inputs and shader options, configure render states, adjust material property visibility in the editor, and more.

> ## Name context

Author: This merge accidentally stomps a section I added. I'll fix it.

Reviewer: Ah, sorry about that!
